Study Area(72%uniqe)

Almora is a district in Uttarakhand's Kumaon division. On the east, it was bounded by Champawat and Pithoragarh, on the north by Bageshwar, Chamoli, and Rudraprayag, on the west by Pauri, and on the south by District Nainital.The district has a total area of 3134 square kilometres. The administrative setup is made up of 11 Development Blocks. Because to the district's steep and mountainous nature, as well as the lack of huge expanses of land, agricultural activity is of a subsistence nature and is practised in river terraces, intermountain valleys, and gently hilly slopes. According to the 2011 census, the population of Almora district is 621,927, ranking it 517th among India's districts (out of a total of 640). The district has a population density of 198 persons per square kilometer (510 people per square mile). It had a population growth rate of -1.73 percent between 2001 and 2011, a sex ratio of 1142 females for every 1000 males, and a literacy rate of 81.06 percent.


In the past, Uttarakhand has experienced an unusually large number of forest fires. Uttarakhand, as a Himalayan state, is abundant in natural resources and has been developed into a significant Eco-region. According to the Champion and Seth Classification of Forest Kinds (1968), the forest area of Uttarakhand state is categorised into nine forest type groups, which are further subdivided into 43 forest types. The forest cover area of Uttarakhand state has been measured at 38,000 sq km, accounting for 71.05 percent of the geographical area. It has the most forest cover among India's northern states.

These woodland areas are extremely vulnerable to forest fires. The occurrence of forest fires has been a regular event in this region, and it has become more active in the last two decades. Uttarakhand state, forest fire has been categorized into three categories the first category is ground fires, the second category shows surface fires, and the last category denotes crown fires. This fire is dependent upon organic material that is founded on of land surface. It is mainly associated with ground materials found beneath the surface litter of the forest floor, such as duff, musk, or peat. Surface fires spread quite rapidly and mostly depend on the little plants and litres of the forest. The Crown fire spreads the tops of trees and plants without coming into contact with surface fire. All of these types of fires can be spotted in the forest sections of Uttarakhand's Almora district.
